add dynamic enum Tutorial (#278)
eclipsesource/jsonforms2-website: content/docs/tutorial/dynamic-enum.mdx

Additionally, they have a field specifying which fields depend on the input.
In the case of the `country` field, the `region` and `city` fields depend on it and will get reset, if the value of the `country` changes.
The `city` field, in turn, is dependent on the `region` field.

```js
{
  "type": "object",
  "x-url": "www.api.com",
  "properties": {
    "country": {
      "type": "string",
      "x-endpoint": "countries",
      "dependencies": ["region", "city"]
    },
    "region": {
      "type": "string",
      "x-endpoint": "regions",
      "dependencies": ["city"]
    },
    "city": {
      "type": "string"
    }
  }
}
```

### Accessing Schema Data and Initialising the React Context

In this step we will access the data from the schema and initialize the react context.

#### Accessing the API URL from Schema

To access the URL defined from the schema we can simply access  the `x-url` attribute.

```js
const url = schema['x-url'];
```

#### Initializing the React Context

Now that we have access to the API URL, we can use React Context to make this data available across our renderers.

> React Context allows you to share data globally within your application, enabling components deep in the component tree to access data without needing to pass properties through all parent elements.

Reviewer: Link to the official react context documentation of react

```suggestion
React Context allows you to share data deep in the component tree to access data without needing to pass additional properties through the component hierarchy.
```

To set up the React Context for your API service, create it in your application as follows:

```js
export const APIContext = React.createContext(new API(url));

const App = () =>{

  ...
  <JsonForms/>
}
```

#### Accessing the API context

Access the API service using the context:

```js
const api = React.useContext(APIContext);
```

> Changing the context's value will trigger a re-render of components that use it, making it a powerful tool for managing dynamic data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Changing the context's value will trigger a re-render of components that use it.
```

```js
type JsonSchemaWithDependenciesAndEndpoint = JsonSchema & {
  dependent: string[];
  endpoint: string;
};
export const Country = (
  props: ControlProps & OwnPropsOfEnum & WithOptionLabel & TranslateProps
) => {
...

  const schema = props.schema as JsonSchemaWithDependenciesAndEndpoint;
  const endpoint = schema.endpoint;
  const dependent = schema.dependent
...
}
```

#### Country Renderer Implementation

The country renderer uses the `APIContext` to query the API and fetch the available options.
We utilize the `useEffect` hook to initialize the options.
While waiting for the API response, we set the available options to empty and display a loading spinner.
In the `handleChange` function, we set the new selected value and reset all dependent fields;
When changing the country, both the region and city will be reset to `undefined`.

```js
import { Unwrapped, WithOptionLabel } from '@jsonforms/material-renderers';

const { MaterialEnumControl } = Unwrapped;

type JsonSchemaWithDependenciesAndEndpoint = JsonSchema & {
  dependent: string[];
  endpoint: string;
};

> export const Country = (

Reviewer: let's not export the raw renderers
```suggestion
const CountryControl = (
```

  props: ControlProps & OwnPropsOfEnum & WithOptionLabel & TranslateProps
) => {
  const { handleChange } = props;
  const [options, setOptions] = useState<string[]>([]);
  const api = React.useContext(APIContext);
  const schema = props.schema as JsonSchemaWithDependenciesAndEndpoint;

  const endpoint = schema.endpoint;
  const dependent: string[] = schema.dependent ? schema.dependent : [];

  useEffect(() => {
    api.get(endpoint).then((result) => {
      setOptions(result);
    });
  }, []);

  if (options.length === 0) {
    return <CircularProgress />;
  }

  return (
    <MaterialEnumControl
      {...props}
      handleChange={(path: string, value: any) => {
        handleChange(path, value);
        dependent.forEach((path) => {
          handleChange(path, undefined);
        });
      }}
      options={options.map((option) => {
        return { label: option, value: option };
      })}
    />
  );
};

> ```

Reviewer: Please add the wrapping code for the renderers, i.e. `withJsonFormsControlProps` etc. here and in the other listings.

  const { handleChange } = props;
  const [options, setOptions] = useState<string[]>([]);
  const api = React.useContext(APIContext);
  const country = useJsonForms().core?.data.country;
  const [previousCountry, setPreviousCountry] = useState<String>();

  const endpoint = schema.endpoint;
  const dependent: string[] = schema.dependent ? schema.dependent : [];

  if (previousCountry !== country) {
    setOptions([]);
    setPreviousCountry(country);
    api.get(endpoint + '/' + country).then((result) => {
      setOptions(result);
    });
  }

  if (options.length === 0 && country !== undefined) {
    return <CircularProgress />;
  }

  return (
    <MaterialEnumControl
      {...props}
      handleChange={(path: string, value: any) => {
        handleChange(path, value);
        dependent.forEach((path) => {
          handleChange(path, undefined);
        });
      }}
      options={options.map((option) => {
        return { label: option, value: option };
      })}
    />
  );
};
```
Again we need to create a [create a tester](./custom-renderers#2-create-a-tester) and [register](./custom-renderers#3-register-the-renderer) the new custom renderer.

> A running example of the scenario can also be seen at the [react-seed](https://github.com/eclipsesource/jsonforms-react-seed) app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

---
id: dynamic-enum
title: Dynamic Renderers
description: This tutorial describes how to create a dynamic enum
---

import { WithRegionRenderer } from '../../../src/components/docs/tutorials/dynamic-enum';

In this tutorial, you will learn how to handle dynamic data in React using [custom renderers](./custom-renderers), React Context, and the `useJsonForms` hook.
This approach allows you to build flexible and interactive forms that adapt to user selections and API responses.

### Scenario

Imagine a form where users need to provide their location by selecting a country, a region and a city.
The options for countries and regions are fetched from an API.
The available regions depend on the selected country.

> To address those requirements, we'll create custom renderers for the country and region.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To address those requirements, we'll create custom renderers for country and region.
```

> The example is also implemented in the [react-seed](https://github.com/eclipsesource/jsonforms-react-seed) app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

<WithRegionRenderer />

#### Schema

To begin, let's introduce the corresponding JSON schema.
We have created an object with properties for country, region, and city.
In our example, the schema also includes a property `x-url`, which specifies the entry point of the corresponding API.

> Both `country` and `region` have a property `endpoint`, indicating the endpoint from which the data should be fetched.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both `country` and `region` have a property `x-endpoint`, indicating the endpoint from which the data should be fetched.
```

  "properties": {
    "country": {
      "type": "string",
      "x-endpoint": "countries",
      "dependencies": ["region", "city"]
    },
    "region": {
      "type": "string",
      "x-endpoint": "regions",
      "dependencies": ["city"]
    },
    "city": {
      "type": "string"
    }
  }
}
```

### Accessing Schema Data and Initialising the React Context

In this step we will access the data from the schema and initialize the react context.

#### Accessing the API URL from Schema

To access the URL defined from the schema we can simply access  the `x-url` attribute.

```js
const url = schema['x-url'];
```

#### Initializing the React Context

Now that we have access to the API URL, we can use React Context to make this data available across our renderers.
React Context allows you to share data globally within your application, enabling components deep in the component tree to access data without needing to pass properties through all parent elements.
To set up the React Context for your API service, create it in your application as follows:

```js
export const APIContext = React.createContext(new API(url));

const App = () =>{

  ...
  <JsonForms/>

> }

Reviewer: We need to use the context in the JSX somewhere

Author: Thanks, I added your suggestions. The context is used in the country and region renderer, but I also added an example on how to access the context right below this chapter.

Reviewer: Ah I see, you're relying on the default context and skip the
```tsx
const APIService = new API(url);
// ...
<APIContext.Provider value={APIService}>
  <JsonForms />
</APIContext.Provider />
```

```

### The Country Renderer

> The core of the country renderer is a dropdown, we can reuse the MaterialEnumControl from the material-renderer set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The core of the country renderer is a dropdown, therefore we can reuse the MaterialEnumControl from the React Material renderer set.
```

To reuse material renderers, the Unwrapped renderers must be used. (more information regarding reusing renderers can be seen [here](./custom-renderers#reusing-existing-controls))

```js
import { Unwrapped, WithOptionLabel } from '@jsonforms/material-renderers';

const { MaterialEnumControl } = Unwrapped;

...

<MaterialEnumControl
      {...props}
      options = {options}
      handleChange = {handleChange}
    />
...
```

With the `MaterialEnumControl`in place the main question remains how to set the `options` and the `handleChange` attribute.
To determine the available options, we need to access the API.
And to implement the `handleChange` function, we need access to the `dependent` field in the schema.

#### Accessing the API context

Access the API service using the context:

```js
const api = React.useContext(APIContext);
```

Changing the context's value will trigger a re-render of components that use it, making it a powerful tool for managing dynamic data.

#### Accessing Schema Data

The `endpoint` and `dependent` fields can be obtained from the schema object provided to the custom renderer via JSON Forms.

> Since these fields are not part of the standard JSON schema type in JSON Forms, we must add them to the schema´s interface and access them as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since these fields are not part of the standard JSON schema type in JSON Forms, we must add them to the schema's interface and access them as follows:
```

```js
type JsonSchemaWithDependenciesAndEndpoint = JsonSchema & {
  dependent: string[];
  endpoint: string;
};
export const Country = (
  props: ControlProps & OwnPropsOfEnum & WithOptionLabel & TranslateProps
) => {
...

  const schema = props.schema as JsonSchemaWithDependenciesAndEndpoint;
  const endpoint = schema.endpoint;
  const dependent = schema.dependent
...
}
```

#### The Country Renderer

The country renderer uses the `APIContext` to query the API and fetch the available options.

> We utilize the `useEffect` hook to reload new options, if API changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We utilize the `useEffect` hook to initialize the options.
```

While waiting for the API response, we set the available options to empty and display a loading spinner.
In the `handleChange` function, we set the new selected value and reset all dependent fields;
When changing the country, both the region and city will be reset to `undefined`.

```js
import { Unwrapped, WithOptionLabel } from '@jsonforms/material-renderers';

const { MaterialEnumControl } = Unwrapped;

type JsonSchemaWithDependenciesAndEndpoint = JsonSchema & {
  dependent: string[];
  endpoint: string;
};

export const Country = (
  props: ControlProps & OwnPropsOfEnum & WithOptionLabel & TranslateProps
) => {
  const { handleChange } = props;
  const [options, setOptions] = useState<string[]>([]);
  const api = React.useContext(APIContext);
  const schema = props.schema as JsonSchemaWithDependenciesAndEndpoint;

  const endpoint = schema.endpoint;
  const dependent: string[] = schema.dependent ? schema.dependent : [];

  useEffect(() => {
    setOptions([]);
    api.get(endpoint).then((result) => {
      setOptions(result);
    });

>   }, [api, endpoint]);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  useEffect(() => {
    api.get(endpoint).then((result) => {
      setOptions(result);
    });
  }, []);
```
